<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>How I Learned to Ride</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="how-i-learned-to-ride" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">How I Learned to Ride</h2>
			<p>When I was a little fellow, we used to study every day, and only on Sundays and holidays went out and played with our brothers. Once my father said:</p>
			<p>“The children must learn to ride. Send them to the riding-school!”</p>
			<p>I was the youngest of the brothers, and I asked:</p>
			<p>“May I, too, learn to ride?”</p>
			<p>My father said:</p>
			<p>“You will fall down.”</p>
			<p>I began to beg him to let me learn, and almost cried. My father said:</p>
			<p>“All right, you may go, too. Only look out! Don’t cry when you fall off. He who does not once fall down from a horse will not learn to ride.”</p>
			<p>When Wednesday came, all three of us were taken to the riding-school. We entered by a large porch, and from the large porch went to a smaller one. Beyond the porch was a very large room: instead of a floor it had sand. And in this room were gentlemen and ladies and just such boys as we. That was the riding-school. The riding-school was not very light, and there was a smell of horses, and you could hear them snap whips and call to the horses, and the horses strike their hoofs against the wooden walls. At first I was frightened and could not see things well. Then our valet called the riding-master, and said:</p>
			<p>“Give these boys some horses: they are going to learn how to ride.”</p>
			<p>The master said:</p>
			<p>“All right!”</p>
			<p>Then he looked at me, and said:</p>
			<p>“He is very small, yet.”</p>
			<p>But the valet said:</p>
			<p>“He promised not to cry when he falls down.”</p>
			<p>The master laughed and went away.</p>
			<p>Then they brought three saddled horses, and we took off our cloaks and walked down a staircase to the riding-school. The master was holding a horse by a cord, and my brothers rode around him. At first they rode at a slow pace, and later at a trot. Then they brought a pony. It was a red horse, and his tail was cut off. He was called Ruddy. The master laughed, and said to me:</p>
			<p>“Well, young gentleman, get on your horse!”</p>
			<p>I was both happy and afraid, and tried to act in such a manner as not to be noticed by anybody. For a long time I tried to get my foot into the stirrup, but could not do it because I was too small. Then the master raised me up in his hands and put me on the saddle. He said:</p>
			<p>“The young master is not heavy⁠—about two pounds in weight, that is all.”</p>
			<p>At first he held me by my hand, but I saw that my brothers were not held, and so I begged him to let go of me. He said:</p>
			<p>“Are you not afraid?”</p>
			<p>I was very much afraid, but I said that I was not. I was so much afraid because Ruddy kept dropping his ears. I thought he was angry at me. The master said:</p>
			<p>“Look out, don’t fall down!” and let go of me. At first Ruddy went at a slow pace, and I sat up straight. But the saddle was sleek, and I was afraid I would slip off. The master asked me:</p>
			<p>“Well, are you fast in the saddle?”</p>
			<p>I said:</p>
			<p>“Yes, I am.”</p>
			<p>“If so, go at a slow trot!” and the master clicked his tongue.</p>
			<p>Ruddy started at a slow trot, and began to jog me. But I kept silent, and tried not to slip to one side. The master praised me:</p>
			<p>“Oh, a fine young gentleman, indeed!”</p>
			<p>I was very glad to hear it.</p>
			<p>Just then the master’s friend went up to him and began to talk with him, and the master stopped looking at me.</p>
			<p>Suddenly I felt that I had slipped a little to one side on my saddle. I wanted to straighten myself up, but was unable to do so. I wanted to call out to the master to stop the horse, but I thought it would be a disgrace if I did it, and so kept silence. The master was not looking at me and Ruddy ran at a trot, and I slipped still more to one side. I looked at the master and thought that he would help me, but he was still talking with his friend, and without looking at me kept repeating:</p>
			<p>“Well done, young gentleman!”</p>
			<p>I was now altogether to one side, and was very much frightened. I thought that I was lost; but I felt ashamed to cry. Ruddy shook me up once more, and I slipped off entirely and fell to the ground. Then Ruddy stopped, and the master looked at the horse and saw that I was not on him. He said:</p>
			<p>“I declare, my young gentleman has dropped off!” and walked over to me.</p>
			<p>When I told him that I was not hurt, he laughed and said:</p>
			<p>“A child’s body is soft.”</p>
			<p>I felt like crying. I asked him to put me again on the horse, and I was lifted on the horse. After that I did not fall down again.</p>
			<p>Thus we rode twice a week in the riding-school, and I soon learned to ride well, and was not afraid of anything.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
