<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Snow-Storm</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="the-snow-storm" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Snow-Storm</h2>
			<section id="the-snow-storm-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>It was past six o’clock in the evening, after drinking tea, that I set out from a posting-station, the name of which I have forgotten, though I remember that it was somewhere in the Don Cossack district, near Novotcherkask. It was quite dark as I wrapped myself in my fur cloak and fur rug and settled myself beside Alyoshka in the sledge. Under the lee of the station-house it seemed warm and still. Though there was no snow falling, there was not a star to be seen overhead, and the sky seemed extraordinarily low and black in contrast with the pure, snowy plain stretched out before us.</p>
				<p>As soon as we had driven out of the village, passing the dark figures of some windmills, one of which was clumsily waving its great sails, I noticed that the road was heavier and thicker with snow, and the wind began to blow more keenly on my left, tossed the horses’ tails and manes on one side, and persistently lifted and blew away the snow as it was stirred up by the sledge-runners and the horses’ hoofs. The tinkle of the bell died away, a draught of cold air made its way through some aperture in my sleeve and blew down my back, and I recalled the advice of the overseer of the station that I should do better not to start that night, or I might be out all night and get frozen on the way.</p>
				<p>'Don’t you think we might get lost?’ I said to the driver. But receiving no reply, I put the question more definitely, 'What do you say, shall we reach the next station? Shan’t we lose the way?’</p>
				<p>'God knows,’ he answered, without turning his head. 'How it drives along the ground! Can’t see the road a bit. Lord, ’a’ mercy!’</p>
				<p>‘Well, but you tell me, do you expect to get to the next station or not?’ I persisted in inquiring. 'Shall we manage to get there?’</p>
				<p>'We’ve got to get there,’ said the driver, and he said something more which I could not catch in the wind.</p>
				<p>I did not want to turn back; but to spend the night driving in the frost and the snow-storm about the absolutely desolate steppe of that part of the Don Cossack district was a very cheerless prospect. And although in the dark I could not see my driver distinctly, I somehow did not take to him, and felt no confidence in him. He was sitting with his legs hanging down before him exactly in the middle of his seat instead of on one side. His voice sounded listless; he wore a big hat with a wavering brim, not a coachman’s cap, and besides he did not drive in correct style, but held the reins in both hands, like a footman who has taken the coachman’s place on the box. And what prejudiced me most of all was that he had tied a kerchief over his ears. In short, the serious, bent back before my eyes impressed me unfavourably and seemed to promise no good.</p>
				<p>‘Well, I think it would be better to turn back,’ said Alyoshka; ‘it’s poor fun being lost.’</p>
				<p>‘Lord, ’a’ mercy! how the snow is flying; no chance of seeing the road; one’s eyes choked up entirely. . . . Lord, ’a’ mercy!’ grumbled the driver.</p>
				<p>We had not driven on another quarter of an hour, when the driver, pulling up the horses, handed the reins to Alyoshka, clumsily extricated his legs from the box, and walked off to look for the road, his big boots crunching in the snow.</p>
				<p>‘Where are you going? Are we off the road, eh?’ I inquired, but the driver did not answer. Turning his head to avoid the wind, which was cutting straight in his face, he walked away from the sledge.</p>
				<p>'Well, found it?’ I questioned him again, when he had come back.</p>
				<p>‘No, nothing,’ he said with sudden impatience and annoyance, as though I were to blame for his having got off the road, and deliberately tucking his big feet back again under the box, he picked up the reins with his frozen gloves.</p>
				<p>'What are we going to do?’ I asked, as we started again.</p>
				<p>'What are we to do? Go whither God leads us.’</p>
				<p>And we drove on at the same slow trot, unmistakably on no sort of road; at one moment in snow that was soft and deep, and the next over brittle, bare ice.</p>
				<p>Although it was so cold, the snow on my fur collar melted very quickly; the drifting snow blew more and more thickly near the ground, and a few flakes of frozen snow began falling overhead.</p>
				<p>It was evident that we were going astray, because after driving another quarter of an hour, we had not seen a single verst post.</p>
				<p>'Come, what do you think,’ I asked the driver again, 'can we manage to get to the station?’</p>
				<p>‘To which station? . . . We shall get back all right if we let the horses go as they please, they ’ll take us there; but I doubt our getting to the other station; only lose our lives, may be.’</p>
				<p>‘Well, then let us go back,’ said I. ‘And really . . .’</p>
				<p>‘Turn back then?’ repeated the driver.</p>
				<p>‘Yes, yes, turn back!’</p>
				<p>The driver let the reins go. The horses went at a better pace, and though I did not notice that we turned round, the wind changed and soon the mills could be seen through the snow. The driver plucked up his spirits and began talking. ‘The other day they were driving back from the next station like this in a snow-storm,’ said he, ‘and they spent the night in some stacks and only arrived next morning. And a good job they did get into the stacks, or they’d have all been clean frozen to death—it was a frost. As it was, one had his feet frost-bitten; and he died of it three weeks after.’</p>
				<p>'But now it’s not so cold and the wind seems dropping,’ said I; 'couldn’t we manage it?’</p>
				<p>'Warmer it may be, but the snow’s drifting just the same. Now it’s behind us, so it seems a bit quieter, but it’s blowing hard. We might have to go if we’d the mail or anything; but it’s a different matter going of our own accord; it’s no joke to let one’s fare freeze. What if I’ve to answer for your honour afterwards?’</p>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
